log files are stored in a proprietary binary format with a .evt or .evtx
Usual location   ->  C:\Windows\System32\winevt\Logs

3 ways of accessing event logs:
    Event Viewer (GUI-based application)
    Wevtutil.exe (command-line tool)        "eventvwr.msc"   <- Type in CMD-Line
    Get-WinEvent (PowerShell cmdlet)
    
5 types of events that can be logged
      Error	          An event that indicates a significant problem such as loss of data or loss of functionality (ex..if a service fails to load during startup)
      Warning	      An event that is not necessarily significant, but may indicate a possible future problem (ex.. low disk space)
      Information	  An event that describes the successful operation of an application, driver, or service (ex.. when a NW driver loads successfully, it may be appropriate to log an Information event)
      Success Audit	  An event that records an audited security access attempt that is successful (ex.. user's successful attempt to log on to the system is logged as a Success Audit event)
      Failure Audit	  An event that records an audited security access attempt that FAILS (ex.. user tries to access a NW drive and fails)

Standard logs are visible under Windows Logs
      Application	  Contains events logged by applications. For example, a database application might record a file error. The application developer decides which events to record.
      Security	    Contains events such as valid and invalid logon attempts, as well as events related to resource use such as creating, opening, or deleting files or other objects. An administrator can start auditing to record events in the security log.
      System	      Contains events logged by system components, such as the failure of a driver or other system component to load during startup.
      CustomLog	    Contains events logged by applications that create a custom log. Using a custom log enables an application to control the size of the log or attach ACLs for security purposes without affecting other applications.

Applications and Services Logs. Expand this section and drill down on Microsoft > Windows > PowerShell > Operational
      Within Properties, you see the log location, log size, and when it was created, modified, and last accessed. Within the Properties window, you can also see the maximum set log size and what action to take once the criteria are met. 
      This concept is known as log rotation. How long to keep logs and when it's permissible to overwrite the logs with new data.

NOTE: the "CLEAR LOG" button at the bottom right. ATTACKERS will likely attempt to clear the logs to go undetected.  
        Note: This is not the only method to clear the event logs for any given event provider.
